**Methods**</br>
#
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As this project is interdisciplinary, in that it is concerned with both history and political science while using a programming approach to the presentation of its results, the approach to research will be varied. Firstly the historical element of this project requires research into four countries, Italy, Germany, Venezuela and Russia, in the 20th century. The time period will capture the social, political and cultural conditions ten years before the rise of the authoritarian regimes. This time-span of ten years is required to establish a consistent snapshot of the country prior to the authoritarian rule. However, the expected ten years worth of research for each country will be vast and difficult to compile single-handedly. As such, a research assistant will be required for every aspect of each individual country in order to dedicatedly research the state properly. In total, the historical branch of this project will require at least ten to twelve research assistants to adequately cover the ten year period of cultural, economical, political and societal research required for the four countries. There is a vast wealth of primary and secondary historical sources available for the purposes of this project. The primary sources will include newspaper articles, television and radio broadcasts and government reports. The secondary sources will include historians’ compilations of research and their analysis of the periods before the rise of the authoritarian leaders.</br> 
#
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Secondly, the secondary historical branch of this research project will require both history and political science research assistants, some with an understanding of survey methods and social media. This branch of the research project will concern itself with the 21st century and the social, economical, political and cultural landscape of the US, the UK, India and Brazil in the decade prior to the rise of President Trump, Prime Minister Johnson, Prime Minister Modi and President Bolsonaro. As such, this research branch will also require approximately ten to twelve dedicated researchers. Since this component also requires historical research, this branch will also make sure of the available primary and secondary sources. However, there is an additional aspect of this branch which will utilise surveys conducted through social media platforms such as Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. These surveys will need to be bought in order to be presented on the social media platforms, and the project will perhaps be required to provide incentives in order to attract survey users. These surveys will be conducted by political science research assistants, aiming to understand the political thoughts of voters in all four countries in the five years preceding the rise of the populist leaders and the current political perspectives of the survey takers. The goal of the surveys is to utilise current real-world data in order to bolster the research taken from political polls and other sources. The results from the surveys, might be limited through its use of social media platforms and internal biases, but can be expected to further the project’s understanding of the conditions leading to the rise of populism in the 21st century by considering the opinions of voters. Lastly, as this research project aims to present its findings in a digital history format, at least two to three research assistants with programming knowledge will be required to assemble and present the data.</br> 
</br>

**Timeline**</br>
#
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The timeline covered by this project spans from approximately 1920 to 2020. The group of approximately 20 to 25 research assistants will be critical to the success of this project as the research required will be lengthy and the sources available are vast. The interdisciplinary approach of this research project also eases the time constraints on the project as the research assistants will be able to work simultaneously and in conjunction with each other. This length of the research project can be projected to extend as far as three years. The immense number of sources available for research will require significant time to evaluate. Similarly, the surveys will also require a certain number of respondents and these responses will also need to be evaluated. The digital assistants will then require time to compile all the data into a presentable format for reader consumption. The presentation of the research will then need to be evaluated for biases and also formatted to address the issue of excess data. The final stages of the research project, the compilation of data, may require more time than the research itself, as there might be simply too much information gathered. A span of one to three years will provide adequate time for evaluation of research and data. Furthermore, the topical nature of the secondary branch of the research project has a large impact upon the time frame of the research. This is because of possible re-elections of political leaders like President Trump, and the possible de-stabilization of political systems as the project is undertaken.</br> 
#
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Another potential issue is the vastness of the research may lengthen the project. In order to prevent this from occurring, and in an effort to promote conciseness, the research scope might be shortened to eight or five years, as required. The division of the project into three separate sections such as the historical branch, the modern branch and the digital branch, will provide the research project with proper direction, reducing the confusion caused by its large scope. Similarly, breaking down each branch into four components: social, economic, political and cultural, with a researcher dedicated to each component will further ensure clarity in the compiling the data. In addition to the political component of the second branch, dedicated research assistants will undertake the creation of surveys, the purchase of space on social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, as well as the engagement of survey takers. This subsection of the political component will likely span the entire length of the project as it will include voter input on current political issues as well as opinions on previous voting choices.  Finally, the research assistants will be able to assist the digital assistants with assembling the data on a digital platform, as they will likely be best suited to deciding on the layout of the data. Overall, the estimated timeline of three years for this project’s completion is feasible and provides adequate accommodation for potential world developments.</br> 
</br>

**Importance**</br>
#
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The rise of populism in the 21st century speaks to a very serious issue of discontent with the world’s political order. The rise of demagogues in the form of US President Donald Trump or Brazil’s President Jair Bolsonaro reveal deep seated issues that have possibly been brewing since before these leaders rose to power. The historical lens of this research project positions this crisis of populism as a possibly repetitive occurrence, raising the question of the stability of the current world order. From the collapse of the balance of power in the 19th and 20th century, the rise and fall of monarchies, communist states and the emergence of populism, history has revealed a cyclical political nature in humanity. An important body of work which examines this question is Steven Livitsky and Daniel Ziblatt’s book, <a href="https://toronto.overdrive.com/media/3359741">_How Democracies Die_</a>. In their research, Livtsky and Ziblatt analyse the rise of authoritarian regimes and contrast it against the backdrop of President Trump’s rise to power. They discuss the identifying features that reveal if a political candidate in a democracy might transform into an authoritarian ruler, using the freedoms permitted within a liberal society against itself. However, their book does not fully examine the historical aspects of the rise of populism in countries like Italy, Germany, Venezuela and Russia, which is understandable because of space constraints evident in a book format.</br>
#
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Similarly, G. John Ikenberry’s journal article, <a href="https://doi-org.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/10.1093/ia/iix241">_The End of Liberal International Order?_</a>, also analyses the rise of populism in relation to its historical roots, but suffers from the same limitations of scope as did Livitsky and Ziblatt’s book. Another critical article is Pankaj Mishar’s <a href="https://www-jstor-org.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/stable/43948381">_The Globalization of Rage: Why Today’s Extremism Looks Familiar_</a>, which examines the historical context of populism and extremism in order to explain the populism evident in today’s world. Mishar’s work examines the role of globalisation in promoting an increase or amplification of populism, providing that as one of the many reasons for its apparent surge in the 21st century. Building upon these authors’ seminal works, this research project will go further by juxtaposing the societal, economical, political and cultural conditions of 20th century states that were toppled by authoritarian regimes against modern societies with populist rulers. In utilising an interdisciplinary framework, combining history, political science and programming, this research project provides a unique lens to analyse, examine and describe the current political order. Furthermore, using digital history further advances the reach and scope of this research, allowing a greater number of people, including academics and students of various fields, to benefit from the research. Ultimately, this research project will aim to understand, as Livitsky and Ziblatt state, whether history repeats itself or whether it rhymes <a href="https://toronto.overdrive.com/media/3359741">(Levitsky, Ziblatt, Pg 23)</a>. 
</br>
</br>
**References:**</br>

[1. Levitsky, Steven and Daniel Ziblatt. 2018. How Democracies Die. New York: Crown Pub.](https://toronto.overdrive.com/media/3359741)</br>
[2. Ikenberry, G. John. 2018. “The End of the Liberal International Order?” International Affairs 94/1: 7-23.](https://doi-org.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/10.1093/ia/iix241)</br>
[3. Pankaj Mishra. 2016. "The Globalization of Rage: Why Today's Extremism Looks Familiar." Foreign Affairs 95/6.](https://www-jstor-org.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/stable/43948381)</br>
